Polkadot Protocol > Basics > Data Encoding (#114)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/basics/data-encoding.md

---
title: Data Encoding

> description: SCALE codec enables fast, efficient data encoding in Substrate, ideal for resource-constrained environments like Wasm, supporting custom types and compact encoding.

Reviewer: The description has 164 characters. Make it a bit shorter

---

# Data Encoding

> Polkadot SDK uses a lightweight and efficient encoding/decoding mechanism to optimize data transmission across the network. This mechanism, known as the **SCALE** codec, is used for serializing and deserializing data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Polkadot SDK uses a lightweight and efficient encoding/decoding mechanism to optimize data transmission across the network. This mechanism, known as the **SCALE** codec, is used for serializing and deserializing data.
```

> The **SCALE** codec plays a vital role in enabling communication between the runtime and the outer node.
> 
> The **SCALE** codec is designed for high-performance, copy-free data encoding and decoding in resource-constrained environments like the Polkadot SDK [WebAssembly runtime](add link to Runtime development page){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **SCALE** codec enables communication between the runtime and the outer node. This mechanism is designed for high-performance, copy-free data encoding and decoding in resource-constrained environments like the Polkadot SDK [Wasm runtime](TODO:update-path){target=\_blank}.
```

It is not self-describing, meaning the decoding context must have full knowledge of the encoded data types. 

> Parity's front-end libraries utilize the [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} crate (a Rust implementation of the SCALE codec) to handle encoding and decoding for interactions between RPCs and the runtime.

Reviewer 2: I'd avoid the direct reference to parity if we can. For the name of the crate, it's ok, but for the rest, we can say something like:

"Front-end libraries utilize ...."

> Parity's front-end libraries utilize the [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} crate (a Rust implementation of the SCALE codec) to handle encoding and decoding for interactions between RPCs and the runtime.

Reviewer: What is the meaning of `front-end` in this context? I'm unsure if this is accurate, as it mentions a Rust crate. I doubt Polkadot.js API, for example, uses the rust crate under the hood. It is probably a js implementation of scale

> The codec is ideal for Polkadot SDK chains and blockchain systems because:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The codec is ideal for Polkadot SDK-based chains because:
```

- It is lightweight compared to generic serialization frameworks like [`serde`](https://serde.rs/){target=\_blank}, which add unnecessary bulk to binaries.
- It doesn’t rely on Rust’s `libstd`, making it compatible with `no_std` environments like Wasm runtime.
- It integrates seamlessly with Rust, allowing easy derivation of encoding and decoding logic for new types using `#[derive(Encode, Decode)]`.

> Defining a custom encoding scheme in Polkadot SDK chain, rather than using an existing Rust codec library, is crucial for enabling cross-platform and multi-language support. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Defining a custom encoding scheme in the Polkadot SDK-based chains, rather than using an existing Rust codec library, is crucial for enabling cross-platform and multi-language support. 
```

> By creating the SCALE codec, Substrate ensures that the encoding can be re-implemented in other languages and platforms to support interoperability between Substrate-based blockchains.

Reviewer: I don't think using a custom encoding scheme is "crucial" for enabling cross-platform, multi-language support and supporting interoperability between Substrate-based blockchains.

The SCALE codec allows us to do this more efficiently, but that's all.

> ## Parity SCALE Codec

Reviewer 2: maybe "SCALE Codec Implementation"

Reviewer: I agree with this one,  just "SCALE Codec" works fine

Rust implementation of the SCALE data format for types used in the Polkadot SDK framework.

The codec is implemented using the following traits:

> - Encode
> - Decode
> - CompactAs
> - HasCompact
> - EncodeLike

Reviewer 2: I'd add a reference to these sections within the page

```suggestion
- [Encode](#encode)
- [Decode](#decode)
- [CompactAs](#compactas)
- [HasCompact](#hascompact)
- [EncodeLike](#encodelike)
```

### Encode

> The `Encode` trait handles data encoding into SCALE format and includes the following key functions:

Reviewer: I agree with Nico here, we should link each trait implementation to the Rust docs

> - s`ize_hint(&self) -> usize`: Estimates the number of bytes required for encoding to prevent multiple memory allocations. This should be inexpensive and avoid complex operations. Optional if the size isn’t known.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `size_hint(&self) -> usize`: Estimates the number of bytes required for encoding to prevent multiple memory allocations. This should be inexpensive and avoid complex operations. Optional if the size isn’t known.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd the a reference to the rust docs here, for example:

- [`size_hint(&self) -> usize`](https://docs.rs/parity-scale-codec/latest/parity_scale_codec/trait.Encode.html#method.size_hint){target=\_blank}: Estimates the number of bytes required for encoding to prevent multiple memory allocations. This should be inexpensive and avoid complex operations. Optional if the size isn’t known.

And the same for the rest of the functions

- `encode_to<T: Output>(&self, dest: &mut T)`: Encodes the data, appending it to a destination buffer.
- `encode(&self) -> Vec<u8>`: Encodes the data and returns it as a byte vector.
- `using_encoded<R, F: FnOnce(&[u8]) -> R>(&self, f: F) -> R`: Encodes the data and passes it to a closure, returning the result.

> 

Reviewer 2: encoded_size is missing here https://docs.rs/parity-scale-codec/latest/parity_scale_codec/trait.Encode.html#method.encoded_size

!!!note
    For best performance, value types should override `using_encoded`, and allocating types should override `encode_to`. It's recommended to implement `size_hint` for all types where possible.

### Decode

> The `Decode` trait handles decoding SCALE-encoded data back into the appropriate types:

Reviewer 2: add reference to the Decode trait in the docs reference

- `fn decode<I: Input>(value: &mut I) -> Result<Self, Error>`: Decodes data from the SCALE format, returning an error if decoding fails.

### CompactAs

> The `CompactAs` trait wraps custom types for compact encoding:

Reviewer 2: add reference to the CompactAs trait in the docs reference

- `encode_as(&self) -> &Self::As`: Encodes the type as a compact type.
- `decode_from(_: Self::As) -> Result<Self, Error>`: Decodes from a compact encoded type.

### HasCompact

> The `HasCompact` trait indicates a type supports compact encoding.

Reviewer 2: add reference to the HasCompact trait in the rust docs

### EncodeLike

> The `EncodeLike` trait is used to ensure multiple types that encode similarly are accepted by the same function. When using `derive`, it is automatically implemented.

Reviewer 2: add reference to the EncodeLike trait in the rust docs

| Tuples                        | A fixed-size series of values, each with a possibly different but predetermined and fixed type. This is simply the concatenation of each encoded value.                     | Tuple of compact unsigned integer and boolean: `(3, false)                        `                                                      | `0x0c00`                                                      |
| Vectors (lists, series, sets) | A collection of same-typed values is encoded, prefixed with a compact encoding of the number of items, followed by each item's encoding concatenated in turn.               | Vector of unsigned `16`-bit integers: `[4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42]               `                                                              | `0x18040008000f00100017002a00`                                |

## SCALE codec libraries

> Several **SCALE** codec implementations are available in various languages. Here's a list of them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several SCALE codec implementations are available in various languages. Here's a list of them:
```

> - AssemblyScript: [`LimeChain/as-scale-codec`](https://github.com/LimeChain/as-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
> - C: [`MatthewDarnell/cScale`](https://github.com/MatthewDarnell/cScale){target=\_blank}
> - C++: [`soramitsu/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}
> - JavaScript: [`polkadot-js/api`](https://github.com/polkadot-js/api){target=\_blank}
> - Dart: [`leonardocustodio/polkadart`](https://github.com/leonardocustodio/polkadart){target=\_blank}
> - Haskell: [`airalab/hs-web3`](https://github.com/airalab/hs-web3/tree/master/packages/scale){target=\_blank}
> - Golang: [`itering/scale.go`](https://github.com/itering/scale.go){target=\_blank}
> - Java: [`emeraldpay/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}
> - Python: [`polkascan/py-scale-codec`](https://github.com/polkascan/py-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
> - Ruby:[` wuminzhe/scale_rb`](https://github.com/wuminzhe/scale_rb){target=\_blank}
> - TypeScript: [`parity-scale-codec-ts`](https://github.com/tjjfvi/subshape){target=\_blank}, [`scale-ts`](https://github.com/unstoppablejs/unstoppablejs/tree/main/packages/scale-ts#scale-ts){target=\_blank}, [`soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library`](https://github.com/soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library){target=\_blank}, [`subsquid/scale-codec`](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-sdk/tree/master/substrate/scale-codec){target=\_blank}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AssemblyScript - [`LimeChain/as-scale-codec`](https://github.com/LimeChain/as-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
- C - [`MatthewDarnell/cScale`](https://github.com/MatthewDarnell/cScale){target=\_blank}
- C++ - [`soramitsu/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}
- JavaScript - [`polkadot-js/api`](https://github.com/polkadot-js/api){target=\_blank}
- Dart - [`leonardocustodio/polkadart`](https://github.com/leonardocustodio/polkadart){target=\_blank}
- Haskell - [`airalab/hs-web3`](https://github.com/airalab/hs-web3/tree/master/packages/scale){target=\_blank}
- Golang - [`itering/scale.go`](https://github.com/itering/scale.go){target=\_blank}
- Java - [`emeraldpay/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}
- Python - [`polkascan/py-scale-codec`](https://github.com/polkascan/py-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
- Ruby - [` wuminzhe/scale_rb`](https://github.com/wuminzhe/scale_rb){target=\_blank}
- TypeScript - [`parity-scale-codec-ts`](https://github.com/tjjfvi/subshape){target=\_blank}, [`scale-ts`](https://github.com/unstoppablejs/unstoppablejs/tree/main/packages/scale-ts#scale-ts){target=\_blank}, [`soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library`](https://github.com/soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library){target=\_blank}, [`subsquid/scale-codec`](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-sdk/tree/master/substrate/scale-codec){target=\_blank}
```

| Tuples                        | A fixed-size series of values, each with a possibly different but predetermined and fixed type. This is simply the concatenation of each encoded value.                     | Tuple of compact unsigned integer and boolean: `(3, false)                        `                                                      | `0x0c00`                                                      |
| Vectors (lists, series, sets) | A collection of same-typed values is encoded, prefixed with a compact encoding of the number of items, followed by each item's encoding concatenated in turn.               | Vector of unsigned `16`-bit integers: `[4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42]               `                                                              | `0x18040008000f00100017002a00`                                |

## Encode & Decode Rust Trait Implementations

Here's how the `Encode` and `Decode` traits are implemented:

>         --8<-- 'code/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/data-encode-decode.rs'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust
--8<-- 'code/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/data-encode-decode.rs'
```
```

---
title: Data Encoding
description: SCALE codec enables fast, efficient data encoding, ideal for resource-constrained environments like Wasm, supporting custom types and compact encoding.
---

# Data Encoding

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Introduction

```

> The Polkadot SDK uses a lightweight and efficient encoding/decoding mechanism to optimize data transmission across the network. This mechanism, known as the **SCALE** codec, is used for serializing and deserializing data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Polkadot SDK uses a lightweight and efficient encoding/decoding mechanism to optimize data transmission across the network. This mechanism, known as the _SCALE_ codec, is used for serializing and deserializing data.
```

> The **SCALE** codec enables communication between the runtime and the outer node. This mechanism is designed for high-performance, copy-free data encoding and decoding in resource-constrained environments like the Polkadot SDK [Wasm runtime](TODO:update-path){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SCALE codec enables communication between the runtime and the outer node. This mechanism is designed for high-performance, copy-free data encoding and decoding in resource-constrained environments like the Polkadot SDK [Wasm runtime](TODO:update-path){target=\_blank}.
```

> It is not self-describing, meaning the decoding context must have full knowledge of the encoded data types. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is not self-describing, meaning the decoding context must fully know the encoded data types. 
```

Parity's libraries utilize the [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} crate (a Rust implementation of the SCALE codec) to handle encoding and decoding for interactions between RPCs and the runtime.

The `codec` mechanism is ideal for Polkadot SDK-based chains because:

- It is lightweight compared to generic serialization frameworks like [`serde`](https://serde.rs/){target=\_blank}, which add unnecessary bulk to binaries
- It doesn’t rely on Rust’s `libstd`, making it compatible with `no_std` environments like Wasm runtime
- It integrates seamlessly with Rust, allowing easy derivation of encoding and decoding logic for new types using `#[derive(Encode, Decode)]`

Defining a custom encoding scheme in the Polkadot SDK-based chains, rather than using an existing Rust codec library, is crucial for enabling cross-platform and multi-language support. 

## SCALE Codec

> Rust implementation of the SCALE data format for types used in the Polkadot SDK framework.

Reviewer 3: This feels incomplete

The codec is implemented using the following traits:

> - [Encode](#encode)
> - [Decode](#decode)
> - [CompactAs](#compactas)
> - [HasCompact](#hascompact)
> - [EncodeLike](#encodelike)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`Encode`](#encode)
- [`Decode`](#decode)
- [`CompactAs`](#compactas)
- [`HasCompact`](#hascompact)
- [`EncodeLike`](#encodelike)
```

### Encode

The [`Encode`](https://docs.rs/parity-scale-codec/latest/parity_scale_codec/trait.Encode.html){target=\_blank} trait handles data encoding into SCALE format and includes the following key functions:

> - `size_hint(&self) -> usize`: Estimates the number of bytes required for encoding to prevent multiple memory allocations. This should be inexpensive and avoid complex operations. Optional if the size isn’t known.
> - `encode_to<T: Output>(&self, dest: &mut T)`: Encodes the data, appending it to a destination buffer.
> - `encode(&self) -> Vec<u8>`: Encodes the data and returns it as a byte vector.
> - `using_encoded<R, F: FnOnce(&[u8]) -> R>(&self, f: F) -> R`: Encodes the data and passes it to a closure, returning the result.
> - `encoded_size(&self) -> usize`: Calculates the encoded size. Should be used when the encoded data isn’t required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`size_hint(&self) -> usize`** - estimates the number of bytes required for encoding to prevent multiple memory allocations. This should be inexpensive and avoid complex operations. Optional if the size isn’t known
- **`encode_to<T: Output>(&self, dest: &mut T)`** - encodes the data, appending it to a destination buffer
- **`encode(&self) -> Vec<u8>`** - encodes the data and returns it as a byte vector
- **`using_encoded<R, F: FnOnce(&[u8]) -> R>(&self, f: F) -> R`** - encodes the data and passes it to a closure, returning the result
- **`encoded_size(&self) -> usize`** - calculates the encoded size. Should be used when the encoded data isn’t required
```

!!!note
    For best performance, value types should override `using_encoded`, and allocating types should override `encode_to`. It's recommended to implement `size_hint` for all types where possible.

### Decode

The [`Decode`](https://docs.rs/parity-scale-codec/latest/parity_scale_codec/trait.Decode.html){target=\_blank} trait handles decoding SCALE-encoded data back into the appropriate types:

> - `fn decode<I: Input>(value: &mut I) -> Result<Self, Error>`: Decodes data from the SCALE format, returning an error if decoding fails.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`fn decode<I: Input>(value: &mut I) -> Result<Self, Error>`** - decodes data from the SCALE format, returning an error if decoding fails
```

### CompactAs

The [`CompactAs`](https://docs.rs/parity-scale-codec/latest/parity_scale_codec/trait.CompactAs.html){target=\_blank} trait wraps custom types for compact encoding:

> - `encode_as(&self) -> &Self::As`: Encodes the type as a compact type.
> - `decode_from(_: Self::As) -> Result<Self, Error>`: Decodes from a compact encoded type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`encode_as(&self) -> &Self::As`** - encodes the type as a compact type
- **`decode_from(_: Self::As) -> Result<Self, Error>`** - decodes from a compact encoded type
```

| Tuples                        | A fixed-size series of values, each with a possibly different but predetermined and fixed type. This is simply the concatenation of each encoded value.                     | Tuple of compact unsigned integer and boolean: `(3, false)                        `                                                      | `0x0c00`                                                      |
| Vectors (lists, series, sets) | A collection of same-typed values is encoded, prefixed with a compact encoding of the number of items, followed by each item's encoding concatenated in turn.               | Vector of unsigned `16`-bit integers: `[4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42]               `                                                              | `0x18040008000f00100017002a00`                                |

> ## Encode & Decode Rust Trait Implementations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Encode and Decode Rust Trait Implementations
```

Here's how the `Encode` and `Decode` traits are implemented:

```rust

> --8<-- 'code/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/data-encode-decode.rs'

Reviewer 3: This is missing the three backticks to close it and I can't leave it as a suggestion - it doesn't work

> ## SCALE codec libraries

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## SCALE Codec Libraries
```

Several SCALE codec implementations are available in various languages. Here's a list of them:

> - AssemblyScript - [`LimeChain/as-scale-codec`](https://github.com/LimeChain/as-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
> - C - [`MatthewDarnell/cScale`](https://github.com/MatthewDarnell/cScale){target=\_blank}
> - C++ - [`soramitsu/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}
> - JavaScript - [`polkadot-js/api`](https://github.com/polkadot-js/api){target=\_blank}
> - Dart - [`leonardocustodio/polkadart`](https://github.com/leonardocustodio/polkadart){target=\_blank}
> - Haskell - [`airalab/hs-web3`](https://github.com/airalab/hs-web3/tree/master/packages/scale){target=\_blank}
> - Golang - [`itering/scale.go`](https://github.com/itering/scale.go){target=\_blank}
> - Java - [`emeraldpay/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}
> - Python - [`polkascan/py-scale-codec`](https://github.com/polkascan/py-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
> - Ruby - [` wuminzhe/scale_rb`](https://github.com/wuminzhe/scale_rb){target=\_blank}
> - TypeScript - [`parity-scale-codec-ts`](https://github.com/tjjfvi/subshape){target=\_blank}, [`scale-ts`](https://github.com/unstoppablejs/unstoppablejs/tree/main/packages/scale-ts#scale-ts){target=\_blank}, [`soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library`](https://github.com/soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library){target=\_blank}, [`subsquid/scale-codec`](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-sdk/tree/master/substrate/scale-codec){target=\_blank}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **AssemblyScript** - [`LimeChain/as-scale-codec`](https://github.com/LimeChain/as-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
- **C** - [`MatthewDarnell/cScale`](https://github.com/MatthewDarnell/cScale){target=\_blank}
- **C++** - [`soramitsu/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}
- **JavaScript** - [`polkadot-js/api`](https://github.com/polkadot-js/api){target=\_blank}
- **Dart** - [`leonardocustodio/polkadart`](https://github.com/leonardocustodio/polkadart){target=\_blank}
- **Haskell** - [`airalab/hs-web3`](https://github.com/airalab/hs-web3/tree/master/packages/scale){target=\_blank}
- **Golang** - [`itering/scale.go`](https://github.com/itering/scale.go){target=\_blank}
- **Java** - [`emeraldpay/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}
- **Python** - [`polkascan/py-scale-codec`](https://github.com/polkascan/py-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
- **Ruby** - [` wuminzhe/scale_rb`](https://github.com/wuminzhe/scale_rb){target=\_blank}
- **TypeScript** - [`parity-scale-codec-ts`](https://github.com/tjjfvi/subshape){target=\_blank}, [`scale-ts`](https://github.com/unstoppablejs/unstoppablejs/tree/main/packages/scale-ts#scale-ts){target=\_blank}, [`soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library`](https://github.com/soramitsu/scale-codec-js-library){target=\_blank}, [`subsquid/scale-codec`](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-sdk/tree/master/substrate/scale-codec){target=\_blank}
```

| Vectors (lists, series, sets) | A collection of same-typed values is encoded, prefixed with a compact encoding of the number of items, followed by each item's encoding concatenated in turn.               | Vector of unsigned `16`-bit integers: `[4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42]               `                                                              | `0x18040008000f00100017002a00`                                |

## Encode and Decode Rust Trait Implementations

Here's how the `Encode` and `Decode` traits are implemented:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/data-encode-decode.rs'
```

## SCALE Codec Libraries

Several SCALE codec implementations are available in various languages. Here's a list of them:

- **AssemblyScript** - [`LimeChain/as-scale-codec`](https://github.com/LimeChain/as-scale-codec){target=\_blank}
- **C** - [`MatthewDarnell/cScale`](https://github.com/MatthewDarnell/cScale){target=\_blank}

> - **C++** - [`soramitsu/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **C++** - [`qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp`](https://github.com/qdrvm/scale-codec-cpp){target=\_blank}
```

- **JavaScript** - [`polkadot-js/api`](https://github.com/polkadot-js/api){target=\_blank}
- **Dart** - [`leonardocustodio/polkadart`](https://github.com/leonardocustodio/polkadart){target=\_blank}
- **Haskell** - [`airalab/hs-web3`](https://github.com/airalab/hs-web3/tree/master/packages/scale){target=\_blank}
- **Golang** - [`itering/scale.go`](https://github.com/itering/scale.go){target=\_blank}

> - **Java** - [`emeraldpay/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Java** - [`splix/polkaj`](https://github.com/splix/polkaj){target=\_blank}
```
